---
title:  Using the sudoers config
date:   2023-11-21 10:40:32 +0200
author: Abe
categories: Linux
---
In order to give users access to commands they usually don't have permission to
use, you can change the sudoers config. This post isn't so much a tutorial but a
quick overview/reminder of how to configure sudo (since I always forget).

## Editing

Editing the sudoers file should be done with `sudo visudo` or by creating a file
in `/etc/sudoers.d/`.

Using `visudo` ensures you don't break your configuration by validating your
changes for syntax issues before saving.

## Order

The sudoers config is read from top to bottom, where the last rule has
preference. This means that giving someone "NOPASSWD" permissions and then
giving that users group permissions without "NOPASSWD" will remove the
"NOPASSWD" option.

## Syntax

The standard syntax of a sudoers config rule can be read as:

```sudoers
Who Where=(AsWhom:AsWhichGropu) Options Commands
```

The user and group default to "ALL" when not specified and options are obviously
optional.

The commands should always be a full path. Imagine specifying the command
"iotop" without a full path and a user creating a file called "iotop"
anywhere in it's path with mallicious code.

The full path of a command can be found with:

```bash
$ which top
/usr/bin/top
```

## User/Group

You can create rules for groups using the percent sign.

```sudoers
root ALL=(ALL:ALL) ALL   # User root
%sudo  ALL=(ALL:ALL) ALL # Group sudo
```

## Aliases

It's possible to create aliases for commands, so you can eaily assign lists of
commands to groups and users.

```sudoers
Cmnd_Alias     MONITOR = /usr/bin/top, /usr/bin/iotop
Cmnd_Alias     WEB = /usr/sbin/nginx
Cmnd_Alias     WEBADMIN = MONITOR, WEB

%webadmin ALL=WEBADMIN
```

## Permissions without password

You can give a user or group permission to use sudo without a password using the
following. Caution is advised.

```sudoers
usernaam ALL=(ALL:ALL) NOPASSWD: /usr/sbin/command
```

## Host

The host directive in the sudoers config exists so you can deploy the same
sudoers file to multiple machines and have different rules apply depending on
the host. If you aren't doing exactly that, it's safe to assume you will want to
use "ALL" for the host part of the rule.
